Zack Johnson

Scenario 2: Dev at Beerz

A. MAIN ETHICAL QUESTIONS
  The main issue here is to what extent should we use user data. There are several options 
ranging from not at all (as in 1.0, where location is deleted right after use), to save and
sell (anonimized) to data brokers. This issue is complicated by the finacial incentives, 
both on the personal and company level towards more capture and use of data.
  It might be valuable to separate the ethical questions of using and storing data vs selling
it to third parties.
  I think there is also an ethical question around the actions of the CEO and clueless colleague
and weather or not you and/or the CTO should take action to confront them about there seeming 
lack of care for these ethical issues.

B. STAKEHOLDER RIGHTS
  I don't think there are any legal issues with any of the cources of action available (assuming
we're in the US) as there are already many companies that operate on this sort of survelance 
capitalism model. However, I would probably argue that people have a moral right to privacy and 
control of their data, or at least to the knowledge of how they're data is being used.

  The buisness and its owner have the right to pursue their buisness as they see fit within the 
legal system. 

C. HELPFUL ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
  I think the options and possiblities are pretty clear. If some sort of compromise was to be 
pursued I would want more information on what minimum level of information might be sell-able 
and if there is a way to sufficiently guard or anonimize that data enough to actually protect 
users.

It would also be nice to understand if it would be possible to build the system in a way that 
automatically enforces short term ness, (1 week) of the data storage.

D. POSSIBLE ACTIONS
  Full Profit: Ignore the ethics and build the system the CEO wants. This is probably the easiest
option in terms of avoiding conflict in the workplace and keeping one's job. It would also allow the 
full intended functionality of the app. The main consequence would of course be the effect on the 
users of the system who now are being tracked and having their data sold and my personal guilt 
building such a system against the god intentions of myself and the CTO.It would also likely cause 
some tension with the CTO who also belives in the privacy mission.

  Beerz 2.0 as planned: Build the app with data collection and use as well as the tight policy of 
scrubbing the data each week. This will require some tough conversations with the CEO and could lead 
to office discord and potentially emplloyment issues. It would allow the full intended functionallity
and would protect users, but there is always the danger that the policy will be changed or removed 
in the future. 

  Don't build Beerz 2.0: Don't build the app, give the CEO an ultimatum (preferably with the CTO) on
your stance on privacy and look to negociate a fully private version. This either leads to the app 
not being created (which is sad), or you lose your job and it is created by others. In this second 
case, the privacy issues in the first option are all likely to result, but at least you have less 
reason to feel guilty. (but you've also lost you job.)

E. ACM CODE OF ETHICS POSITION
  The code includes a section calling for computer professionals to respect privacy. This is a pretty 
strong endorcement for the limited data collection options.

  It also emphasized the leaders need to ensure that the public good is at the center of buisness goals.
This prodives a good argument for approaching/confronting the CEO and discussing the ethics of the 
project woth the goal of getting all execs on board with the lower data impact solution.

F. RECCOMENDATION
  I would start by having further discussions with everyone in that meeting. Talk to the CTO, figure 
out between the two of you what is limited enough, (if short term storage is ok or not, etc.). Then 
talk to the CEO, bring up the code of ethics and your conserns, describe how the company can operate
without the additional revenue stream, etc. If you can get the CEO on board, procede with the 2.0 and 
move on to discussions/trainings with other devs to get them on board/thinking about the ethics.
  If you fail to get the CEO on board, go to other devs, see if there is general support for the ethical 
solution and attempt to use that to sway the CEO. 
  If nothing works, build the system the CEO wants, but attempt as much as possible to protect user data,
don't collect unneeded data, and/or make clear notifications about the data collection. If these efforts 
are blocked and you can't make headway with your arguments, look for a new job.
